* Model Description in DIESEL

DIESEL is a *model description language*, it is used to
describe the various pieces that make up a dynamical system model.  In
this chapter, we will provide an overview of DIESEL programming
concepts.  The next chapter will describe the specific facilities
provided by DIESEL.

** DIESEL (.dsl) Files
DIESEL model descriptions are stored in standard ASCII text files
with a .dsl file extension (referred to hereafter as a *.dsl
file*).  When a DIESEL model description gets built into a simulation
engine (we’ll talk about this more when we talk about simex), the
simEngine compiler searches through the .dsl file to find a model
definition that matches the file name.  This model is referred to as
the *top-level model*, because it ultimately contains all other
models and functions.

For example, if we tell the simEngine compiler to compile a .dsl file
called **myModel.dsl**, it will search through **myModel.dsl** until it
finds a definition for a model called **myModel**.  **myModel** is the
top-level model.  The file can also define other models or functions,
but it has to contain a model definition for **myModel** to be built by
the simEngine compiler.  You can create a. dsl file without a matching
model definition, but in that case that file has to be used as a model
library, and models that it contains can not be directly built by the
simEngine compiler.

** Model Definition

In DIESEL, a model represents a dynamical system.  Externally, it is
a black box with inputs and outputs available.  Internally, it may use
difference equations, differential equations, define its own internal
models, and use various integration methods.

Models are defined using the **model** keyword.  

The first line of a model definition is always a *model definition
header*.  A model definition header begins with the **model** keyword, and
includes a list of one or more outputs, the equals sign, the name of
the model class, and a list of one or more inputs.

A model definition includes definitions of simulation quantities,
equations, and nested submodels.

The model definition ends with a matching **end** keyword.  

For example:

<src lang="dsl">
   model (area, diameter, circumference) = Circle (r)
      //The model definition line above defines a new model class called "Circle"
      //With one input called "r"
      //And three outputs called "area", "diameter", and "circumference"
     constant pi = 3.1415926
      equations
         area = pi*r^2
         diameter = 2*r
         circumference = pi*diameter
      end  //This "end" statement ends the equation block
   end  //This "end" statement ends the definition of "Circle"
</src>

The **//** characters represent comments.  All text between the **//** and the
end of the line is ignored.

At a minimum, all DIESEL models must have at least one output.  So the
following code would be correct:

<src lang="dsl">
model (pi) = piMaker
  constant pi = 3.1415926
end
</src>

** Model Inputs
Model inputs are quantities which are not known at compile time and
are to be modified during the course of a simulation.  Inputs can be
both static values and can change in time through the course of a
simulation.  Inputs can initialize states, specify run time
parameters, or include a complicated input stimulus waveform pattern.

Model inputs are defined in the model definition header.  Within the
body of a model definition, the keyword **input** can be used to specify
additional properties of model inputs.  **input** is followed by the
keyword **with**, and a list of comma-delimited input options enclosed
within curly braces .  In the current version of simEngine, the only
option available for model inputs is to specify the default input
value.  The default value is specified using the **default** keyword.

<src lang="dsl">
model(x) = expDecay(decayRate)
  //a default decay rate of one
  input x with {default = 1}
  state x = 10
  equation x' = -decayRate*x
end
</src>

If a default value is not specified within the model definition block,
it must be provided by a higher-level model, or explicity defined when
calling simEngine through the simex interface.  If no options are
specified for an input, then the declaration on the model definition
header is sufficient for declaring an input.

#sampledinputs
*** Sampled Inputs

The simEngine compiler supports the use of an input stimulus pattern
through sampled inputs.  A sampled input is an input where the
difference in time between successive values is constant, and is
determined by a sampling frequency.  For example, a array of step
input data might look like =[0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1]=.  Apply a sampling
frequency to that, for example of 100 Hz, would apply each of these
values at *0 ms, 10 ms, ..., 50 ms*.  Copying, the same example before,
but this time using a sampled input would be written as the following:

<src lang="dsl">
model(x) = expDecay(decayRate)
  // specify a 100Hz discrete iterator
  iterator n with {discrete, sample_frequency=100}
  // specify the iterator that describes the sampling rate
  input decayRate with {iter = n}
  state x = 10
  equation x' = -decayRate*x
  // specify a fixed time step solver to match the input
  solver=forwardeuler{dt=0.01}
end
</src>

Inside simex, we can then define our input to our model using the same
set of sampled data:

<src lang="matlab">
>> inputs.decayRate = [0 0 0 1 1 1];
>> output = simex('expDecay.dsl', 0.1, inputs);
</src>

What happens when we the simulation runs out of data?  In **decayRate**,
we defined only values from 0 ms to 50 ms, yet we requested the
simulation to run until 0.1 s. There is an additional property of an
input that specifies what the default behavior is when we run out of
data.  The **exhausted** property has three possible settings: **hold** (the
default), **repeat**, and **stop**.  The default property, **hold**, maintains the
last value until the end of the simulation.  So in our example above,
the value 1 will be maintained on **decayRate** until the simulation
finishes.  If instead we specified that the input is to repeat as in

<src lang="dsl">
input decayRate with {iter=n, exhausted=repeat}
</src>

the input stimulus would look like =[0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1]=,
ranging from 0 ms to 0.1 s in steps of 10 ms.  Finally, with the
**stop** option, the simulation will prematurely end after
0.05 ms after all the input data has been exhausted.

There are no limits in simEngine to how many inputs there are or how
many different sampling rates are defined.  It is suggested that
sampled inputs are used with fixed time step solvers.  A variable time
step solver, such as **ode23** or **ode45**, can take large enough time steps
that input changes are effectively skipped over.  A fixed-time step
solver, or the use of **CVODE** with an fixed update rate specified, is
recommended to ensure that inputs are processed as expected in
simulation.


** Model Outputs
Model outputs are defined in the model definition header.  Outputs are
automatically assigned to model quantities (constants, state
variables, or intermediate equations) with the same name.  If a model
quantity with the same name does not exist, the **output** keyword can be
used within the body of a model definition to alias or group model
quantities to a named output.  For example,

<src lang="dsl">
model(out1, out2, out3) = simpleModel(in1)
  input in1 with {default = 0}
  state x = 1
  state y = 2
  state z = 3

  /*State variable equations, etc. go here*/

  output out1 = x           //assign output "out1" to "x"
  output out2 = (x, y, z)   //assign "out2" to a group containing x, y, and z
  output out3 = in1*(x + y) //assign "out3" to a computed expression
end
</src>

The **output** keyword can also be used to create conditional outputs.
Sometimes we only want a model to produce an output under specific
conditions.  To do this, we follow the **output** keyword and definition
with the keyword **with**, followed by a list of conditions contained
within curly braces and seperated by commas.  For example:

<src lang="dsl">
output out1 = x when {x > 0}     //output x only when x is greater than zero
  
//The following equation detects the moment 
//when x crosses zero in a rising direction
equation crossing =                     
  {1 when x[n-1] < 0 and x[n] >= 0,
   0 otherwise}  
output out2 = y when {crossing == 1}   //output y only when x crosses zero 
</src>

For more information on constructing conditional outputs, see
[[#conditionalexps][conditional expressions]], below.

** Constants

Constants are model quantities that never change during the execution
of a model.  Their value is set when the model is compiled by the
simEngine compiler.  Constants are defined within the body of a model
definition by using the **constant** keyword.  For example:

<src lang="dsl">
   model (x) = expDecay(decayRate)
      constant pi = 3.1415926
      state x = 10                 
       
      equation x' = -decayRate*pi*x
   end
</src>

Constants are useful for two reasons.  First, by defining a value as a
constant, you are assured that the quantity can not be reassigned
later.  If you attempt to override the value of a constant, simEngine
will generate an error message.  The second reason is that constants
can be shared amongst models.  In the example above, the constant **pi**
could be moved outside of the model declaration and then be visible to
all models defined below the constant.

** States
A *state* is a quantity of which the value may evolve throughout a
simulation.  Typically, the value of a state is governed by an initial
value and one or more equations.

A state is declared as follows:

<src lang="dsl">
model StateExample
  state x = 3
  state y
  y.setInitialValue(2)
  state z (0 to 1 by 0.1) = 0
end
</src>

States *must* have initial values associated with them.  By default, a
state will hold its initial values unless an equation is defined for
it.  Initial values are set in the form

<src lang="dsl">
  state <name> = <initial value>
</src>

Because an initial value is *the initial value*, it must be able to be
resolved prior to a simulation beginning.  An initial value is an
expression constisting of numerical literals, constants, and inputs.

All other properties of a state are assigned using the **with** syntax.
The **with** syntax is optional.  If not used, all fields will assume
their default values.

<src lang="dsl">
  state <name> = <initial value> with {<setting>=<value>, <setting>=<value>, ...}
</src>

All states have an iterator associated with them, the default being **t**.
An example of changing the iterator is


<src lang="dsl">
  state Vi = 0 with {iter=n}
</src>

** Equations
; %% \subsection{Algebraic State Equations and Intermediate Equations}

; %% Algebraic equations assign the value of the right hand side of the
; %% equation into the quantity specified on the left hand side.  If the
; %% quantity is a state, this equation is called an \emph{algebraic state
; %% equation}; if the quantity has not been declared, the equation is an
; %% \emph{intermediate equation}.

; %% \subsub

; %% Algebraic equations are a special form of equation.  They are the only
; %% form of equation in which the quantity on the left hand side does not
; %% have to have been declared already.  If it does not exist, an
; %% ``intermediate'' quantity will be created in the model (or submodel if
; %% referenced as such).  If a quantity by that name already exists, it
; %% must be an intermediate quantity (have been created by another
; %% algebraic equation).  If so, its equation will be replaced by the
; %% newer definition.

; %% Examples follow:

; %% <src lang="dsl">
; %% model Interms
; %%   model Test
; %%   end
  
; %%   submodel t = Test.new()

; %%   equations
; %%     x = 3 //creates x
; %%     t.z = 2 //creates z inside t
; %%   end
; %% end
; %% </src>

; %% Algebraic equations have a special behavior: they are macro expanded wherever they occur in other equations at compile time.  That is, the following two equations are equivalent:

; %% <src lang="dsl">
; %% equation x' = 3 + z

; %% equation i = z
; %% equation x' = 3 + i
; %% </src>

; %% Algebraic equations may also be used to couple models together.

; %% <src lang="dsl">
; %% model Component
; %%   equation x = 0
; %% end

; %% model c1 = Component.new()
; %% model c2 = Component.new()

; %% equation c1.x = c2.x + 1
; %% equation c2.x = c1.x - 1
; %% </src>


Equations are defined either individually or in equation blocks.  All
equations (except intermediate equations) require a state on the left
hand side of the equals sign and an expression on the right.

Examples follow:

<src lang="dsl">
model (x,y) = Test

  state x = 3
  state y = 0

  state w = 2

  constant z = 2

  equation w' = w - y

  equations
    x' = y + z - w
    y' = z - x
  end
end
</src>


*** Differential Equations

Differential equations are specified by placing a tick (') after the
assigned state in an equation.  At the moment, only first order
differential equations are supported in DIESEL.

Example:

<src lang="dsl">
model Ramp
  state x = 0
  equation x' = 1
end
</src>
  
How the differential equation is solved depends on the integration
method, or solver, specified on the iterator that is associated with
the state.  See the section on [[#iterators][iterators]].


*** Difference Equations

A difference equation is specified by using temporal indexing with a
discrete iterator.  The left hand side of the equation *must*
reference the *next* time value, meaning for iterator **n** it
would be **n+1**.

An example would be

<src lang="dsl">
model (x) = fibbonaci
  state x = 0 with {iterator=n}

  equation x[n+1] = x[n] + x[n-1]
end
</src>

Since this model uses time references before **n**, the simulation will
populate storage for these sharing the same initial value as the state
at the current iteration, **x[n]**.


*** Intermediate Equations and Algebraic State Equations

Algebraic equations assign the value of the right hand side of the
equation into the quantity specified on the left hand side.  If the
quantity is a state, this equation is called an *algebraic state
equation*; if the quantity has not been declared, the equation is an
*intermediate equation*.

**** Intermediate Equations

When a direct assignment equation is specified, and the assigned
quantity does not have a previous state declaration, the equation is
an *intermediate equation*.  This means that the value for this
quantity is computed and then substituted into reads of the quantity
during the same iteration.  For more information about iterations, see
the section on iterators.

The semantics make the following two equation blocks equivalent.

<src lang="dsl">
  equations
    equation x' = y + z * 2
  end
  
  equations
    equation a = z * 2
    equation x' = y + a
  end
</src>


**** Algebraic State Equations

*Algebraic State Equations* are direct assignment equations where the
quantity on the left hand side has been declared previously as a
state.  That is, the quantity has storage.

Unlike Intermediate Equations, *Algebraic State Equations* update model
state.  This means that a read to one will read the value of the
*previous* iteration, not the one computed during the current
iteration.

An example algebraic equation is

<src lang="dsl">
  state x = 0
  equation x = x + 1
</src>



An algebraic equation may have an optional boolean condition.  This
condition specifies when the equation is to be evaluated and to update
the quantity.  Multiple equations of this form, referred to as *Update
Equations*, may be specified.  When multiple conditions are
simultaneously true, the results are undefined.

An example of using update equations to perform saturation is

<src lang="dsl">
  state x = 0
  equation x' = y - 2
  equation x = 10 when x > 10
</src>

In this case, the value **x** is governed by it's differential equation
unless it's value becomes greater than 10.  Note that update equations
are run after all other equations, so in this example if **x** passed 10,
it would be reset to 10 in that same iteration.

** Submodels

An instance of a model may be nested inside of the definition of
another model.  The nested model is referred to as a *submodel*.

When a submodel is *instantiated*, the instance is given a name, the
model definition of the instance is described, and inputs may be given
values.

An example is

<src lang="dsl">
model simpleSolarSystem
  submodel celestialbody sun with {x=0, y=0, mass=1.99e30}
  submodel celestialbody planet with {x=1.49e8, y=0}

  planet.mass = 5.97e24
end
</src>

Notice that there are two ways to assign inputs: by listing the name
and value in a **with** clause or in an assignment after the definition.
Notice the lack of an **equation** keyword.  Assignments to inputs are not
treated as equations in the system.

** The Top-Level Model

The outermost model is considered to be the *top-level model*.  This
model has several key differences from submodels.

The iterators that it defines take precedence over any iterators (of
the same name) defined in sub-models.  

The inputs into it are *external inputs*.  External inputs are specified
external to the simulation, in matlab.  See the section on
[[sampled inputs][#sampledinputs]].

#iterators
** Iterators

Iterators are a means to describe how state variables evolve in time
and how simEngine should treat state variables that evolve with
different time scales.  By assigning different iterators to different
state variables, you can improve the performance of simEngine by
devoting the computational resources of more accurate solvers to the
state variables that require them.

Iterators can be one of two types: *continuous* or
*discrete*.  Continuous iterators represent *time*, and
discrete iterators represent *iteration number*.

DIESEL has two default iterators.  The default continuous iterator is
**t** and the default discrete iterator is **n**.  Regardless as to whether an
iterator is continuous or discrete, new iterators are defined using
the **iterator** keyword.  States, by default, use the **t** iterator.  They
must be manually reassigned to use a different one.  An example of how
to do this is

<src lang="dsl">
state x = 0 with {iterator=n}
</src>

*** Continuous Iterators

A *continuous iterator* is used to describe the integration method, and
parameters thereof, used to solve differential equations.  It will
also describe how time is evolved during a simulation.

*** Discrete Iterators

A discrete iterator is useful for difference equations and other
equation and outputs that should be run at a regular frequency.  The
value of the iterator itself is a count that is incremented at the
specified sampling frequency.


<src lang="dsl">
model (x1,x2) = expDecay(decayRate)
   input decayRate with {default = 10}
   iterator i1 with {continuous, solver=cvode{dt=0.1}}
   iterator i2 with {continuous, solver=forwardeuler{dt=0.01}}
   state x1 = 100 with {iter = i1}
   state x2 = 100 with {iter = i2}
   equation x1' = -decayRate*x1
   equation x2' = -decayRate*x2
end 
</src>



** Solvers

Solvers are the means by which a differential equation is numerically
solved.  

See the [[#solvers][section on solvers]] for more information.


** Time Indexing

Time indexing refers to the method for accessing past values of
states.

For discrete iterators, the syntax is brackets containing an offset
relative to the discrete iterator.  An example is

<src lang="dsl">
equation x[n+1] = (x[n] + x[n-1] + y[n])/3
</src>

The offset must be an absolute difference from the discrete iterator.
Other operations (multiply, divide, etc) may not be used in temporal
indexing.

For continuous iterators a different syntax is used.  Since the
timestep is determined by the integration method, adding or
subtracting to a continuous iterator does not necessarily translate to
a reference that is a fixed number of iterations back.  The syntax is
instead

<src lang="dsl">
equation x' = y + z[t[-1]]
</src>

In this case, the continuous iterator is referenced with a negative
integer representing the number of iterations *before* the
current one to look back.  Using no reference is equivalent to
referencing at the iteration 0 ago.
